# Timezone Type Storability Analysis**Research date:** 2026-04-13**Author:** Frank (Lead/Architect, Language Designer)**Context:** Response to Shane's "Well define storable" challenge against the claim that "entity data should not carry timezone identity" while the proposed architecture stores timezone identity as `string`.---## The ChallengeIn the enterprise timezone analysis, I wrote this architecture:```preceptfield IncidentTimestamp as instantfield IncidentTimezone as string notempty```And stated: "Entity data should not carry timezone identity. `ZonedDateTime` as a field type is still excluded."Shane's response: **"Well define storable."**Two words. Devastating. Let me work through why.---## Question 1: Is the "Entity Data Shouldn't Carry Timezone Identity" Claim Self-Contradictory?### Yes. The claim as stated is self-contradictory.Let me be precise about what I wrote and what I did:- **Claim:** "Entity data should not carry timezone identity."- **Architecture:** `field IncidentTimezone as string notempty` — a field whose entire purpose is to carry timezone identity.That's not subtle. I declared a field. I named it `IncidentTimezone`. Its value is `"America/Los_Angeles"`. That is timezone identity stored as entity data. The claim says one thing; the architecture does the opposite.**What I think I meant vs. what I actually said:**What I meant was something narrower: "Entity data should not carry timezone identity *as a structured temporal type* — no field should have a type that binds a point in time to a timezone as an atomic unit." The concern was about `ZonedDateTime` as a *type*, not about timezone data existing anywhere in the entity.But "entity data should not carry timezone identity" does not mean that. Those words, taken at face value, mean: no timezone data in the entity. And then I put timezone data in the entity. The claim is wrong as stated — not just imprecise, but wrong. The architecture I proposed *requires* timezone identity in entity data for the multi-timezone compliance rules I accepted as valid.**The honest correction:**The actual boundary I was defending is: "Entity fields should not use `ZonedDateTime` as a type." That's a claim about the *type system*, not about *what data the entity stores*. The entity can and should store timezone identifiers when the domain requires them. The question is what *type* they carry.And that brings us directly to Shane's real question.---## Question 2: If `date` Exists Because "Encoding Dates as Strings Loses Type Safety," Does the Same Argument Apply to Timezones?### The parallel is exact, and it's damning.Here's the argument I used (and that the team used) for creating the `date` type:> Encoding calendar dates as strings loses type safety. `field DueDate as string` means the compiler can't verify that `"2026-01-15"` is a valid date. The author can write `set DueDate = "not a date"` and it compiles fine. Arithmetic becomes impossible — `DueDate + days(30)` is meaningless on a string. Comparison semantics are wrong — `"2026-01-15" < "2026-02-01"` is a lexicographic comparison, not a calendar comparison (which happens to work for ISO format but breaks for other formats). The `date` type solves all of this: compile-time validation of literals, runtime validation of inputs, correct arithmetic, correct comparison.Now apply everything after "Encoding" to timezones:> Encoding timezone identifiers as strings loses type safety. `field IncidentTimezone as string` means the compiler can't verify that `"America/Los_Angeles"` is a valid IANA timezone identifier. The author can write `set IncidentTimezone = "Not/A/Timezone"` and it compiles fine. The error surfaces only at runtime, when `toLocalDate(IncidentTimestamp, IncidentTimezone)` encounters an invalid timezone string — and then as a runtime exception, not a constraint violation. Worse, the author can write `set IncidentTimezone = "California"` — a natural mistake when the field is paired with an `IncidentState` field — and the contract compiles, looks reasonable, and blows up at runtime.**What's worse about the timezone case:**With dates, the string representation at least has a canonical format (ISO 8601) and lexicographic comparison happens to give correct results. With timezone identifiers, there's no useful lexicographic ordering, no format the compiler can infer, and a rich set of plausible-but-wrong values. `"EST"` is not an IANA timezone identifier (it's an abbreviation — `America/New_York` is the identifier). `"US/Pacific"` is a deprecated alias. `"Pacific Standard Time"` is a Windows-only identifier, not IANA. These are exactly the kinds of errors that a typed system prevents and that a string field silently accepts.**The argument for `date` is an argument for `timezone`.**| Concern | `field DueDate as string` | `field IncidentTimezone as string` ||---------|--------------------------|-----------------------------------|| Invalid literal accepted at compile time | Yes — `set DueDate = "nope"` compiles | Yes — `set IncidentTimezone = "nope"` compiles || Compile-time validation of known values | No | No || Runtime validation of event args | Author's responsibility | Author's responsibility || Meaningful operations on the value | No — string ops don't understand dates | No — string ops don't understand timezones || Type communicates intent | No — `string` could be anything | No — `string` could be anything || Solved by typed alternative | `date` — validates, compares, does arithmetic | `timezone` — validates at compile/runtime |If I accept the argument for `date`, I must either accept it for `timezone` or explain what's categorically different. Let me try.**Is there a categorical difference?**One candidate: `date` has *operations* (comparison, arithmetic) that strings can't replicate, whereas `timezone` has *no operations* — it's just a validated string. You can't add two timezones. You can't compare them in a domain-meaningful way. A `timezone` type would be, operationally, a validated string — a string that the compiler knows is a valid IANA timezone identifier.That's... a real difference. But it's not a difference that undermines the type-safety argument. The `choice` type is also a validated string with no operations (beyond equality/contains and ordered comparison). `choice("CA", "NY", "TX")` exists precisely because the compiler should reject values that aren't in the declared set. A `timezone` type would serve the same function: the compiler should reject values that aren't valid IANA identifiers.**The difference is one of degree, not kind.** `date` has both validation AND operations. `timezone` would have validation only. Both are improvements over bare `string` for the same underlying reason: the type communicates what the data *means*, and the compiler can enforce that meaning.**My honest assessment: the argument for `date` over `string` applies, with equal force, to `timezone` over `string`.** I don't have a principled distinction that makes one valid and the other not.---## Question 3: A `timezone` Type### What it would look like```preceptfield IncidentTimezone as timezone```Properties:- **Literal validation:** `timezone("America/Los_Angeles")` is validated at compile time against the IANA TZ database. `timezone("Not/A/Thing")` is a compile error.- **Runtime validation:** Event arguments declared `as timezone` are validated at fire time. Invalid timezone identifiers produce a constraint-violation-style rejection, not a runtime exception.- **No arithmetic.** No `timezone + timezone`. No `timezone - timezone`. No ordering beyond equality.- **Equality:** `==` and `!=` — matching by IANA canonical identifier.- **String interop:** The conversion functions `toLocalDate`, `toLocalTime`, `toInstant` would take `timezone` instead of `string`. This closes the type-safety gap at the boundary: you can't accidentally pass a non-timezone string to a conversion function.```preceptprecept MultiRegionInsuranceClaimfield IncidentTimestamp as instantfield FiledTimestamp as instantfield IncidentState as choice("CA", "NY", "TX", "FL", "IL")field IncidentTimezone as timezoneinvariant FiledTimestamp <= toInstant(    toLocalDate(IncidentTimestamp, IncidentTimezone) + days(30),    time(23, 59, 0),    IncidentTimezone) because "Claim must be filed by 11:59 PM local time on the 30th day after the incident"```### What changes from the previous proposalThe previous proposal had `field IncidentTimezone as string notempty`. The new proposal has `field IncidentTimezone as timezone`. The difference:| | `string` approach | `timezone` approach ||---|---|---|| Compile-time literal validation | No | Yes — `timezone("US/Pacific")` warns about deprecated alias || Runtime arg validation | No (unless author adds custom invariant) | Yes — automatic, same as `date` || Type safety in conversion functions | No — `toLocalDate(instant, string)` accepts any string | Yes — `toLocalDate(instant, timezone)` rejects non-timezone || Self-documenting intent | Weak — field name is the only hint | Strong — type declares intent || Constraint vocabulary | `notempty`, `minlength`, `maxlength` (irrelevant) | None needed — the type IS the constraint || Error locality | Runtime, in the conversion function | Compile-time for literals; fire-time for args, at the arg boundary |### Does this close the type-safety gap without introducing ZonedDateTime?Yes. Completely. The timezone is now a typed, validated value. The conversion functions accept `timezone` values, not arbitrary strings. The entity stores timezone identity — which it always did — but now with type safety on par with `date` for dates.And critically: **this adds zero temporal complexity.** A `timezone` is not a temporal type. It's a metadata type — it identifies a set of UTC offset rules. It has no instants, no dates, no times, no arithmetic with temporal values. It's closer in spirit to `choice` than to `date`. The IANA TZ database is the validation source, the same way the choice member list is the validation source for `choice`.---## Question 4: What "ZonedDateTime as a Precept Type" Would Actually Mean### Stripping away what I was actually afraid ofMy Fatal rating for ZonedDateTime was driven by specific concerns:1. **Component accessors** (`.year`, `.month`, `.day`, `.hour`) on a timezone-dependent type create non-deterministic expressions.2. **Hidden timezone dependency** buried in a type makes the TZ database dependency invisible.3. **Arithmetic ambiguity** — adding `days(1)` to a ZonedDateTime during a DST transition creates the ambiguity problem.4. **The type carries hidden state** — two ZonedDateTime values can represent the same instant but report different components.Shane asks: what if we strip all of that away?### A minimal ZonedDateTime composite```zoneddatetime = instant + timezoneComparison: compares by instant (deterministic — UTC nanosecond comparison)Accessors:  .instant → instant (the UTC point in time — deterministic)  .timezone → timezone (the timezone identifier — deterministic)NOT supported:  .year, .month, .day, .hour, .minute, .second — compile error  zoneddatetime + days(n) — compile error  zoneddatetime - zoneddatetime — compile error (use .instant - .instant for Duration)Construction:  zoneddatetime(instant_value, timezone_value)```### Evaluating the Fatal concerns against this minimal composite**Concern 1: Component accessors creating non-deterministic expressions.**Eliminated. The minimal composite has no component accessors. To get the local date, you call `toLocalDate(zdt.instant, zdt.timezone)` — the timezone dependency is explicit in the function call, not hidden in an accessor.**Concern 2: Hidden timezone dependency.**Reduced but not eliminated. The `.timezone` accessor returns the timezone, and the conversion functions take it explicitly. But the *construction* of the ZonedDateTime still couples an instant to a timezone as an atomic unit. The question is: is this coupling worse than having them as two separate fields? Functionally, no — the same data is present either way. But the composite type creates a *single field* that encodes two concepts and requires decomposition to use. That's not hidden in the way a NodaTime `ZonedDateTime.LocalDateTime.Hour` is hidden — `.instant` and `.timezone` are explicit — but it is one more layer of indirection.**Concern 3: Arithmetic ambiguity.**Eliminated. No arithmetic on the composite. All temporal arithmetic operates on the decomposed components — `zdt.instant + hours(4)` works because it's `instant` arithmetic. Calendar arithmetic goes through conversion functions explicitly.**Concern 4: Hidden state / representation non-uniqueness.**Present but manageable. Two `zoneddatetime` values can have the same `.instant` but different `.timezone` (e.g., `2026-01-15T12:00Z in America/New_York` and `2026-01-15T12:00Z in America/Chicago`). Comparison by instant means `==` compares the physical moment — two different _contexts_ for the same moment would be "equal." This is probably the right semantic, but it needs to be documented clearly.### Is this actually Fatal?No. Let me be honest: this minimal composite, as Shane defines it, is functionally identical to `instant + timezone` as two separate fields, with the only differences being:1. **Bundling**: one field instead of two.2. **Co-assignment guarantee**: you can't set the instant without the timezone (or vice versa) because they're constructed together.3. **API convenience**: `zdt.instant` and `zdt.timezone` are accessors, not field references.The co-assignment guarantee in (2) is actually a real benefit. With two separate fields, the author can write:```precept-> set IncidentTimestamp = Submit.Timestamp# Forgot to set IncidentTimezone!```And now the entity has a timestamp without a timezone. The invariant catches it eventually (via `notempty` on the timezone field), but the *structural coupling* is lost — the compiler doesn't know that these two fields are semantically bound. A composite type enforces the binding: you can't construct a `zoneddatetime` without both components.**But.**### The remaining objection is not about safety. It's about complexity budget.The minimal `zoneddatetime` is safe. But is it *worth it*? Here's what it costs:1. **A new type** in the type system. Every new type ripples through the parser, type checker, evaluator, semantic tokens, completions, MCP DTOs, grammar, and documentation. The language surface sync checklist has 6 impact categories, each with multiple touch points.2. **Constructor syntax.** `zoneddatetime(instant_value, timezone_value)` is a constructor — Precept currently has no constructors. `date("2026-01-15")` is a literal, not a constructor (one argument, always a string literal). A true two-argument constructor is new syntax. Or we make it a function — but then it's a function that returns a composite, which is also new.3. **Accessor syntax.** `.instant` and `.timezone` on a composite type are new accessor forms. Precept has `.count`, `.min`, `.max`, `.peek`, `.length` on collections and strings — all parameterless. Accessors on a custom composite type are a generalization of this.4. **Null semantics.** Is `zoneddatetime nullable`? If so, are `.instant` and `.timezone` nullable when accessed on a nullable `zoneddatetime`? This is `C56` (null accessor check) applied to a composite type, but the null-narrowing rules need to propagate through the accessor.5. **Default value semantics.** What's the default for a `zoneddatetime` field? Both `instant` and `timezone` have no natural "zero" — `instant` defaults to epoch, but `timezone` defaults to... what? `UTC`? There is no universally sensible default timezone.6. **Collection inner type.** `set of zoneddatetime`? The ordering semantic (sorted ascending) would sort by instant, which is deterministic. But is it useful? This needs deliberate consideration.None of these are *impossible*. But each is a design surface that doesn't exist today, and each requires careful resolution before the type ships. Compare this to `instant + timezone` as two separate fields: the fields use existing type machinery, existing null semantics, existing default handling, existing collection support. Nothing new in the type system.---## Question 5: The Principled Difference Between Two Fields and One Composite### Restating Shane's question precisely> You accepted Instant with "no component accessors." You accepted timezone strings as entity data. What is the principled difference between allowing those as two separate fields vs. one composite field?### The honest answer: there is no *principled* safety difference.The data is the same. The safety properties are the same (assuming the `timezone` type I described in Question 3). The composite doesn't add risk; the two fields don't add safety. The information stored in the entity is identical either way.**The remaining differences are pragmatic, not principled:**| | Two fields (`instant` + `timezone`) | One composite (`zoneddatetime`) ||---|---|---|| Type system cost | Zero — uses existing types | High — new composite type with constructor, accessors, null rules, collection behavior || Co-assignment enforcement | None — author must remember to set both | Structural — can't construct without both || Decomposition required for use | No — fields are already decomposed | Yes — must access `.instant` and `.timezone` to do anything useful || Existing type system machinery | Everything works | Constructor, composite accessors, composite defaults are all new || Teaching complexity | `instant` and `timezone` are independently understandable | `zoneddatetime` requires understanding composition + decomposition || Ergonomic benefit | Minimal ceremony per field | One-field declaration; structured binding |The co-assignment benefit is real. The type system cost is also real. And the decomposition requirement partially negates the ergonomic benefit — if the only way to do anything with a `zoneddatetime` is `zdt.instant` and `zdt.timezone`, the bundling mostly serves construction, not consumption.---## Verdict: Does the Fatal Rating Survive?### No. The Fatal rating for ZonedDateTime does not survive this analysis.Let me be precise about what falls and what stands:**What falls:**The blanket Fatal rating for "ZonedDateTime as a type" was based on concerns (component accessors, hidden TZ dependency, arithmetic ambiguity) that Shane's minimal composite definition eliminates. A `zoneddatetime` with only `.instant` and `.timezone` accessors, comparison by instant, and no arithmetic or component accessors is not Fatal. It is not even dangerous. It is functionally identical to two separate fields with a structural co-assignment guarantee.**What I'm replacing the Fatal rating with: Deferred — viable but not yet justified by the cost/benefit analysis.**The minimal `zoneddatetime` composite is safe. But the question is not "is it safe?" — the question is "does it earn its place in the type system?" Precept's type surface is deliberately small. Every new type has a cost (parser, type checker, evaluator, completions, grammar, MCP, docs, tests — the full sync surface). The benefit of `zoneddatetime` over `instant + timezone` as separate fields is primarily co-assignment enforcement and declaration ergonomics. That may be sufficient — but it's a cost/benefit question, not a safety question.**What stands:**The exclusion of NodaTime-style `ZonedDateTime` with component accessors (`.year`, `.month`, `.day`, `.hour`), calendar arithmetic (`zdt + days(1)`), and ambiguity resolution. That remains Fatal for the same reasons: non-deterministic expressions, hidden TZ dependency in accessors, and arithmetic ambiguity at DST transitions. The minimal composite Shane describes is a *different type* that shares a name — it's really `InstantWithContext`, not NodaTime's `ZonedDateTime`.### What should ship, and when**Phase 1 (with `instant`):** The `timezone` type. This is the clearest win from this analysis. It closes the type-safety gap that Shane exposed, it parallels the `date` argument exactly, it has zero temporal complexity, and it costs relatively little in the type system (validated string, like `choice` but with IANA validation instead of a declared member set). The conversion functions would accept `timezone` instead of `string`.**Phase 2 (demand-gated):** The minimal `zoneddatetime` composite. If enterprise adoption shows that `instant + timezone` as separate fields creates real co-assignment bugs or ergonomic friction, the composite type addresses it. But this requires the constructor/accessor/null/default infrastructure that doesn't exist today. Ship it when the demand justifies the infrastructure.---## Revised Architecture```preceptprecept MultiRegionInsuranceClaimfield ClaimNumber as string notemptyfield IncidentTimestamp as instantfield FiledTimestamp as instantfield IncidentState as choice("CA", "NY", "TX", "FL", "IL")field IncidentTimezone as timezone                          # ← WAS: string notemptyfield ClaimAmount as decimal default 0 nonnegative maxplaces 2field ApprovedAmount as decimal default 0 nonnegative maxplaces 2state Filed initial, UnderReview, Approved, Denied# Filing deadline: 11:59 PM local time on the 30th day after the incident,# in the timezone where the incident occurred.# Now with type-safe timezone — compiler rejects invalid IANA identifiers.invariant FiledTimestamp <= toInstant(    toLocalDate(IncidentTimestamp, IncidentTimezone) + days(30),    time(23, 59, 0),    IncidentTimezone) because "Claim must be filed by 11:59 PM local time on the 30th day after the incident"invariant ApprovedAmount <= ClaimAmount because "Approved amount cannot exceed claim amount"invariant FiledTimestamp >= IncidentTimestamp because "Claim cannot be filed before the incident"# Event arg is typed as timezone — runtime validates before the transition firesevent Submit with Claimant as string, Amount as decimal, Timestamp as instant, State as string, Timezone as timezoneevent Reviewevent Approve with Amount as decimalevent Denyfrom Filed on Submit    -> set ClaimAmount = Submit.Amount    -> set IncidentTimestamp = Submit.Timestamp    -> set FiledTimestamp = Submit.Timestamp    -> set IncidentState = Submit.State    -> set IncidentTimezone = Submit.Timezone    -> transition UnderReviewfrom UnderReview on Approve when Approve.Amount <= ClaimAmount    -> set ApprovedAmount = Approve.Amount    -> transition Approvedfrom UnderReview on Deny -> transition Denied```### What changed from the enterprise analysis sketch1. `field IncidentTimezone as string notempty` → `field IncidentTimezone as timezone`2. `Timezone as string` in event arg → `Timezone as timezone`3. Conversion functions accept `timezone` type, not `string`4. Compile-time validation of timezone literals5. Runtime validation of timezone event args at the fire boundary### What the auditor gainsThe auditor now sees `field IncidentTimezone as timezone` and knows:- This field holds a valid IANA timezone identifier — guaranteed by the type system.- The conversion functions that reference it are type-safe — you can't accidentally pass a state name into a timezone parameter.- Invalid timezone strings are rejected at the fire boundary, not deep inside invariant evaluation.---## Summary of Position Changes| Previous claim | Revised claim | What changed ||---|---|---|| "Entity data should not carry timezone identity" | Entity data carries timezone identity — the question is whether it's typed or untyped | The claim was self-contradictory; the architecture always stored timezone data || `ZonedDateTime` as a type: Fatal | Minimal `zoneddatetime` composite (instant + timezone, no component accessors): Deferred — viable but not yet justified by cost/benefit | Shane's minimal definition eliminates the specific concerns that drove the Fatal rating || Timezone as `string`: acceptable | Timezone as `string`: has the same type-safety problem that `date` was created to solve | The `date` argument applies to timezones with equal force || No `timezone` type needed | `timezone` type should ship with `instant` | Follows directly from the `date` parallel; closes the type-safety gap || Conversion functions take `string` timezone parameter | Conversion functions take `timezone` parameter | The `timezone` type makes the functions type-safe at the call boundary |---## Open Questions for Shane1. **`timezone` type: does it ship with `instant` in v2, or separately?** I've proposed Phase 1 = `timezone` ships with `instant`. The argument: if `instant` ships with conversion functions, those functions need a timezone parameter, and that parameter should be typed. If `instant` ships *without* conversion functions (comparison + duration arithmetic only), then `timezone` could wait. But once conversion functions exist, `timezone` should exist.2. **`zoneddatetime` composite: is the co-assignment guarantee worth the type system cost?** This is a prioritization question, not a safety question. The minimal composite is safe. The question is whether the co-assignment failure mode (forgetting to set one of two paired fields) is common enough to justify the infrastructure.3. **Naming:** `timezone` matches NodaTime's `DateTimeZone`, which is the backing type. But `tz`, `zone`, `timezoneId` are alternatives. I prefer `timezone` — it's the most self-documenting and aligns with the "English-ish but not English" design philosophy. Follow-up: if `zoneddatetime` ever ships, is that the right name, or is `timestamped` / `instantwithzone` clearer about what the minimal composite actually is?---